About the journal
Aims and scope
SoftwareX aims to acknowledge the impact of software on today's research practice, and on new scientific discoveries in almost all research domains. SoftwareX also aims to stress the importance of the software developers who are, in part, responsible for this impact.

To this end, SoftwareX aims to support publication of research software in such a way that:

The software is given a stamp of scientific relevance, and provided with a peer-reviewed recognition of scientific impact;

The software developers are given the credits they deserve;

The software is citable, allowing traditional metrics of scientific excellence to apply;

The academic career paths of software developers are supported rather than hindered;

The software is publicly available for inspection, validation, and re-use.

Above all, SoftwareX aims to inform researchers about software applications, tools and libraries with a (proven) potential to impact the process of scientific discovery in various domains. The journal is multidisciplinary and accepts submissions from within and across subject domains such as those represented within the broad thematic areas below:

Mathematical and Physical Sciences;

Environmental Sciences;

Medical and Biological Sciences;

Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences.

Originating from these broad thematic areas, the journal also welcomes submissions of software that works in cross cutting thematic areas, such as citizen science, cybersecurity, digital economy, energy, global resource stewardship, health and wellbeing, etcetera.

SoftwareX specifically aims to accept submissions representing domain-independent software that may impact more than one research domain.

Domain independent underpinning software tools and technologies have for too long been underrepresented in academic literature. We wish to ensure that these software items get academic recognition and welcome submissions of software tools and services that may otherwise not have a publication home. Examples include mathematical or image processing libraries or methodologies, visualization tools, data management, etcetera.

Through the quality of the description and of the (potential) impact of the software deposited we aim that significant reuse will occur both within and without the original developing domain and therefore encourage consideration of this reuse factor when submitting and in the language used within the description.

Submissions to SoftwareX consist of two major parts:

A short descriptive paper of 3000-word limit;

An open-source software distribution with support material.

The manuscript you submit must be regarded as an accompanying note for the benefit of readers and potential users of your software.

Submissions are accepted only if they follow the journal-specific templates:

Word templates (please note that figures must be directly embedded in the .docx file):

Original software publication

Software update

LaTeX templates:

Original software publication

Software update.

For any questions contact us at: softwarex@elsevier.com

All software publications published in SoftwareX are hosted on a repository on GitHub. A copy of the 'accepted for publication' version of software/code will be copied to the journal's GitHub repository for archiving purposes.
Go to the SoftwareX GitHub repository

Peer review
This journal follows a single anonymized review process. Your submission will initially be assessed by our editors to determine suitability for publication in this journal. If your submission is deemed suitable, it will typically be sent to a minimum of two reviewers for an independent expert assessment of the scientific quality. The decision as to whether your article is accepted or rejected will be taken by our editors.

Read more about peer review.

Our editors are not involved in making decisions about papers which:

they have written themselves.

have been written by family members or colleagues.

relate to products or services in which they have an interest.

Any such submissions will be subject to the journal's usual procedures and peer review will be handled independently of the editor involved and their research group. Read more about editor duties.

Authors may submit a formal appeal request to the editorial decision, provided it meets all the requirements and follows the procedure outlined in Elsevier’s Appeal Policy. Only one appeal per submission will be considered and the appeal decision will be final.

Special issues and article collections
The peer review process for special issues and article collections follows the same process as outlined above for regular submissions, except, a guest editor may send the submissions out to the reviewers and may recommend a decision to the journal editor. The journal editor oversees the peer review process of all special issues and article collections to ensure the high standards of publishing ethics and responsiveness are respected and is responsible for the final decision regarding acceptance or rejection of articles.

Open access
We refer you to our open access information page to learn about open access options for this journal.

Ethics and policies
Ethics in publishing
Authors must follow ethical guidelines stated in Elsevier's Publishing Ethics Policy.

Submission declaration
When authors submit an article to an Elsevier journal it is implied that:

the work described has not been published previously except in the form of a preprint, an abstract, a published lecture, academic thesis or registered report. See our policy on multiple, redundant or concurrent publication.

the article is not under consideration for publication elsewhere.

the article's publication is approved by all authors and tacitly or explicitly by the responsible authorities where the work was carried out.

if accepted, the article will not be published elsewhere in the same form, in English or in any other language, including electronically, without the written consent of the copyright-holder.

To verify compliance with our journal publishing policies, we may check your manuscript with our screening tools.

Authorship
All authors should have made substantial contributions to all of the following:

The conception and design of the study, or acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data.

Drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content.

Final approval of the version to be submitted.

Authors should appoint a corresponding author to communicate with the journal during the editorial process. All authors should agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work to ensure that the questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.

Changes to authorship
The editors of this journal generally will not consider changes to authorship once a manuscript has been submitted. It is important that authors carefully consider the authorship list and order of authors and provide a definitive author list at original submission.

The policy of this journal around authorship changes:

All authors must be listed in the manuscript and their details entered into the submission system.

Any addition, deletion or rearrangement of author names in the authorship list should only be made prior to acceptance, and only if approved by the journal editor.

Requests to change authorship should be made by the corresponding author, who must provide the reason for the request to the journal editor with written confirmation from all authors, including any authors being added or removed, that they agree with the addition, removal or rearrangement.

All requests to change authorship must be submitted using this form. Requests which do not comply with the instructions outlined in the form will not be considered.

Only in exceptional circumstances will the journal editor consider the addition, deletion or rearrangement of authors post acceptance.

Publication of the manuscript may be paused while a change in authorship request is being considered.

Any authorship change requests approved by the journal editor will result in a corrigendum if the manuscript has already been published.

Any unauthorized authorship changes may result in the rejection of the article, or retraction, if the article has already been published.

Declaration of competing interests
All authors must disclose any financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence or bias their work. Examples of potential competing interests include:

Employment

Consultancies

Stock ownership

Honoraria

Paid expert testimony

Patent applications or registrations

Grants or any other funding

Affiliation with the journal as an Editor or Advisory Board Member

The declarations tool should always be completed.

Authors with a journal affiliation to declare should enter the following text under “Other Activities” within the  declarations tool and should inform the journal and publisher prior to completing the submission process:
Given their role as [insert journal role title], [insert your name] had no involvement in the peer-review of this article and has no access to information regarding its peer-review.  Full responsibility for the editorial process for this article was delegated to another journal editor.

Authors with no competing interests to declare should select the option "I have nothing to declare".

The resulting Word document containing your declaration should be uploaded at the "attach/upload files" step in the submission process. It is important that the Word document is saved in the .doc/.docx file format. Author signatures are not required.

Funding sources
Authors must disclose any funding sources who provided financial support for the conduct of the research and/or preparation of the article. The role of sponsors, if any, should be declared in relation to the study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of data, writing of the report and decision to submit the article for publication. If funding sources had no such involvement this should be stated in your submission.

List funding sources in this standard way to facilitate compliance to funder's requirements:

Funding: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant numbers xxxx, yyyy]; the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA [grant number zzzz]; and the United States Institutes of Peace [grant number aaaa].

It is not necessary to include detailed descriptions on the program or type of grants, scholarships and awards. When funding is from a block grant or other resources available to a university, college, or other research institution, submit the name of the institute or organization that provided the funding.

If no funding has been provided for the research, it is recommended to include the following sentence:

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Declaration of generative AI in scientific writing
Authors must declare the use of generative AI in scientific writing upon submission of the paper. The following guidance refers only to the writing process, and not to the use of AI tools to analyse and draw insights from data as part of the research process:

Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies should only be used in the writing process to improve the readability and language of the manuscript.

The technology must be applied with human oversight and control and authors should carefully review and edit the result, as AI can generate authoritative-sounding output that can be incorrect, incomplete or biased. Authors are ultimately responsible and accountable for the contents of the work.

Authors must not list or cite AI and AI-assisted technologies as an author or co-author on the manuscript since authorship implies responsibilities and tasks that can only be attributed to and performed by humans.

The use of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in scientific writing must be declared by adding a statement at the end of the manuscript when the paper is first submitted. The statement will appear in the published work and should be placed in a new section before the references list. An example:

Title of new section: Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process.

Statement: During the preparation of this work the author(s) used [NAME TOOL / SERVICE] in order to [REASON]. After using this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the published article.

The declaration does not apply to the use of basic tools, such as tools used to check grammar, spelling and references. If you have nothing to disclose, you do not need to add a statement.

Please read Elsevier’s author policy on the use of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies, which can be found in our GenAI Policies for journals.

Please note: to protect authors’ rights and the confidentiality of their research, this journal does not currently allow the use of generative AI or AI-assisted technologies such as ChatGPT or similar services by reviewers or editors in the peer review and manuscript evaluation process, as is stated in our GenAI Policies for journals. We are actively evaluating compliant AI tools and may revise this policy in the future.

Preprints
Preprint sharing
Authors may share preprints in line with Elsevier's article sharing policy. Sharing preprints, such as on a preprint server, will not count as prior publication.

We advise you to read our policy on multiple, redundant or concurrent publication.

Free preprint posting on SSRN
In support of open science this journal offers authors a free preprint posting service on SSRN to ensure early registration and dissemination of research and facilitate early citations and collaboration. Posting to SSRN is subject to SSRN's standard checks.

You will be provided with the option to release your manuscript on SSRN during the submission process. Agreeing to this option will have no effect on the editorial process or outcome, and your manuscript will remain publicly available and free to read on SSRN whether our editors accept or reject your manuscript.

You will receive an email when your preprint is posted online on SSRN and a Digital Object Identifier (DOI) is assigned.

Corresponding authors must seek approval from all co-authors before agreeing to release a manuscript publicly on SSRN.

We advise you to read about SSRN, including the SSRN Terms of Use and SSRN FAQs before selecting this option.

Use of inclusive language
Inclusive language acknowledges diversity, conveys respect to all people, is sensitive to differences, and promotes equal opportunities. Authors should ensure their work uses inclusive language throughout and contains nothing which might imply one individual is superior to another on the grounds of:

age

gender

race

ethnicity

culture

sexual orientation

disability or health condition

We recommend avoiding the use of descriptors about personal attributes unless they are relevant and valid. Write for gender neutrality with the use of plural nouns ("clinicians, patients/clients") as default. Wherever possible, avoid using "he, she," or "he/she."

No assumptions should be made about the beliefs of readers and writing should be free from bias, stereotypes, slang, reference to dominant culture and/or cultural assumptions.

These guidelines are meant as a point of reference to help you identify appropriate language but are by no means exhaustive or definitive.

Reporting sex- and gender-based analyses
There is no single, universally agreed-upon set of guidelines for defining sex and gender. We offer the following guidance:

Sex and gender-based analyses (SGBA) should be integrated into research design when research involves or pertains to humans, animals or eukaryotic cells. This should be done in accordance with any requirements set by funders or sponsors and best practices within a field.

Sex and/or gender dimensions of the research should be addressed within the article or declared as a limitation to the generalizability of the research.

Definitions of sex and/or gender applied should be explicitly stated to enhance the precision, rigor and reproducibility of the research and to avoid ambiguity or conflation of terms and the constructs to which they refer.

We advise you to read the Sex and Gender Equity in Research (SAGER) guidelines and the SAGER checklist (PDF) on the EASE website, which offer systematic approaches to the use of sex and gender information in study design, data analysis, outcome reporting and research interpretation.

For further information we suggest reading the rationale behind and recommended use of the SAGER guidelines.

Definitions of sex and/or gender

We ask authors to define how sex and gender have been used in their research and publication. Some guidance:

Sex generally refers to a set of biological attributes that are associated with physical and physiological features such as chromosomal genotype, hormonal levels, internal and external anatomy. A binary sex categorization (male/female) is usually designated at birth ("sex assigned at birth") and is in most cases based solely on the visible external anatomy of a newborn. In reality, sex categorizations include people who are intersex/have differences of sex development (DSD).

Gender generally refers to socially constructed roles, behaviors and identities of women, men and gender-diverse people that occur in a historical and cultural context and may vary across societies and over time. Gender influences how people view themselves and each other, how they behave and interact and how power is distributed in society.

Jurisdictional claims
Elsevier respects the decisions taken by its authors as to how they choose to designate territories and identify their affiliations in their published content. Elsevier’s policy is to take a neutral position with respect to territorial disputes or jurisdictional claims, including, but not limited to, maps and institutional affiliations. For journals that Elsevier publishes on behalf of a third party owner, the owner may set its own policy on these issues.

Maps: Readers should be able to locate any study areas shown within maps using common mapping platforms. Maps should only show the area actually studied and authors should not include a location map which displays a larger area than the bounding box of the study area. Authors should add a note clearly stating that "map lines delineate study areas and do not necessarily depict accepted national boundaries”.  During the review process, Elsevier’s editors may request authors to change maps if these guidelines are not followed.

Institutional affiliations: Authors should use either the full, standard title of their institution or the standard abbreviation of the institutional name so that the institutional name can be independently verified for research integrity purposes.

Studies in humans
Authors must follow ethical guidelines for studies carried out in humans.

Work which involves the use of human subjects should be carried out in accordance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki: Ethical principles for medical research involving human subjects.

Manuscripts should follow the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) recommendations for the conduct, reporting, editing and publication of scholarly work in medical journals and aim to be representative of human populations in terms of sex, age and ethnicity. Sex and gender terms should be used correctly, as outlined by WHO (World Health Organization).

Manuscripts must include a statement that all procedures were performed in compliance with relevant laws and institutional guidelines and have been approved by the appropriate institutional committee(s). The statement should contain the date and reference number of the ethical approval(s) obtained.

Manuscripts must also include a statement that the privacy rights of human subjects have been observed and that informed consent was obtained for experimentation with human subjects.

This journal will not accept manuscripts that contain data derived from unethically sourced organs or tissue, including from executed prisoners or prisoners of conscience, consistent with recommendations by Global Rights Compliance on Mitigating Human Rights Risks in Transplantation Medicine. For all studies that use human organs or tissues, sufficient evidence must be provided that these were procured in line with WHO Guiding Principles on Human Cell, Tissue and Organ Transplantation. For clinical studies, a statement of informed consent having been obtained from a patient or their nominated representative, paired with ethical approval for the study from a suitable institution, as required by the policies of the journal, may be considered sufficient evidence, but the journal reserves the right to request additional evidence in cases where it feels this is not sufficient. The source of the organs or tissues used in clinical research must be transparent and traceable. If your manuscript describes organ transplantation you must additionally declare within the manuscript that:

autonomous consent free from coercion was obtained from the donor(s) or their next of kin.

organs and/or tissues were not sourced from executed prisoners or prisoners of conscience.

Writing and formatting
File format
We ask you to provide editable source files for your entire submission (including figures, tables and text graphics). Some guidelines:

Save files in an editable format, using the extension .doc/.docx for Word files and .tex for LaTeX files. A PDF is not an acceptable source file.

Format Word files in a single-column layout. Double-column formatting is only permitted for LaTeX submissions.

Remove any strikethrough and underlined text from your manuscript, unless it has scientific significance related to your article.

Use spell-check and grammar-check functions to avoid errors.

We advise you to read our Step-by-step guide to publishing with Elsevier.

Title page
You are required to include the following details in the title page information:

Article title. Article titles should be concise and informative. Please avoid abbreviations and formulae, where possible, unless they are established and widely understood, e.g. DNA.

Author names. Provide the given name(s) and family name(s) of each author. The order of authors should match the order in the submission system. Carefully check that all names are accurately spelled. If needed, you can add your name between parentheses in your own script after the English transliteration.

Affiliations. Add affiliation addresses, referring to where the work was carried out, below the author names. Indicate affiliations using a lower-case superscript letter immediately after the author's name and in front of the corresponding address. Ensure that you provide the full postal address of each affiliation, including the country name and, if available, the email address of each author.

Corresponding author. Clearly indicate who will handle correspondence for your article at all stages of the refereeing and publication process and also post-publication. This responsibility includes answering any future queries about your results, data, methodology and materials. It is important that the email address and contact details of your corresponding author are kept up to date during the submission and publication process.

Present/permanent address. If an author has moved since the work described in your article was carried out, or the author was visiting during that time, a "present address" (or "permanent address") can be indicated by a footnote to the author's name. The address where the author carried out the work must be retained as their main affiliation address. Use superscript Arabic numerals for such footnotes.

Abstract
You are required to provide a concise and factual abstract which does not exceed 250 words. The abstract should briefly state the purpose of your research, principal results and major conclusions. Some guidelines:

Abstracts must be able to stand alone as abstracts are often presented separately from the article.

Avoid references. If any are essential to include, ensure that you cite the author(s) and year(s).

Avoid non-standard or uncommon abbreviations. If any are essential to include, ensure they are defined within your abstract at first mention.

Keywords
You are required to provide 1 to 7 keywords for indexing purposes. Keywords should be written in English. Please try to avoid keywords consisting of multiple words (using "and" or "of").

We recommend that you only use abbreviations in keywords if they are firmly established in the field.

Highlights
You are encouraged to provide article highlights at submission.

Highlights are a short collection of bullet points that should capture the novel results of your research as well as any new methods used during your study. Highlights will help increase the discoverability of your article via search engines. Some guidelines:

Submit highlights as a separate editable file in the online submission system with the word "highlights" included in the file name.

Highlights should consist of 3 to 5 bullet points, each a maximum of 85 characters, including spaces.

We encourage you to view example article highlights and read about the benefits of their inclusion.

Graphical abstract
You are encouraged to provide a graphical abstract at submission.

The graphical abstract should summarize the contents of your article in a concise, pictorial form which is designed to capture the attention of a wide readership. A graphical abstract will help draw more attention to your online article and support readers in digesting your research. Some guidelines:

Submit your graphical abstract as a separate file in the online submission system.

Ensure the image is a minimum of 531 x 1328 pixels (h x w) or proportionally more and is readable at a size of 5 x 13 cm using a regular screen resolution of 96 dpi.

Our preferred file types for graphical abstracts are TIFF, EPS, PDF or MS Office files.

We encourage you to view example graphical abstracts and read about the benefits of including them.

Math formulae
Submit math equations as editable text, not as images.

Present simple formulae in line with normal text, where possible.

Use the solidus (/) instead of a horizontal line for small fractional terms such as X/Y.

Present variables in italics.

Denote powers of e by exp.

Display equations separately from your text, numbering them consecutively in the order they are referred to within your text.

Tables
Tables must be submitted as editable text, not as images. Some guidelines:

Place tables next to the relevant text or on a separate page(s) at the end of your article.

Cite all tables in the manuscript text.

Number tables consecutively according to their appearance in the text.

Please provide captions along with the tables.

Place any table notes below the table body.

Avoid vertical rules and shading within table cells.

We recommend that you use tables sparingly, ensuring that any data presented in tables is not duplicating results described elsewhere in the article.

Figures, images and artwork
Figures, images, artwork, diagrams and other graphical media must be supplied as separate files along with the manuscript. We recommend that you read our detailed artwork and media instructions. Some excerpts:

When submitting artwork:

Cite all images in the manuscript text.

Number images according to the sequence they appear within your article.

Submit each image as a separate file using a logical naming convention for your files (for example, Figure_1, Figure_2 etc).

Please provide captions for all figures, images, and artwork.

Text graphics may be embedded in the text at the appropriate position. If you are working with LaTeX, text graphics may also be embedded in the file.

Artwork formats
When your artwork is finalized, "save as" or convert your electronic artwork to the formats listed below taking into account the given resolution requirements for line drawings, halftones, and line/halftone combinations:

Vector drawings: Save as EPS or PDF files embedding the font or saving the text as "graphics."

Color or grayscale photographs (halftones): Save as TIFF, JPG or PNG files using a minimum of 300 dpi (for single column: min. 1063 pixels, full page width: 2244 pixels).

Bitmapped line drawings: Save as TIFF, JPG or PNG files using a minimum of 1000 dpi (for single column: min. 3543 pixels, full page width: 7480 pixels).

Combinations bitmapped line/halftones (color or grayscale): Save as TIFF, JPG or PNG files using a minimum of 500 dpi (for single column: min. 1772 pixels, full page width: 3740 pixels).

Please do not submit:

files that are too low in resolution (for example, files optimized for screen use such as GIF, BMP, PICT or WPG files).

disproportionally large images compared to font size, as text may become unreadable.

Figure captions
All images must have a caption. A caption should consist of a brief title (not displayed on the figure itself) and a description of the image. We advise you to keep the amount of text in any image to a minimum, though any symbols and abbreviations used should be explained.

Provide captions in a separate file.

Color artwork
If you submit usable color figures with your accepted article, we will ensure that they appear in color online.

Please ensure that color images are accessible to all, including those with impaired color vision. Learn more about color and web accessibility.

Generative AI and Figures, images and artwork
Please read our policy on the use of generative AI and AI-assisted tools in figures, images and artwork, which can be found in Elsevier’s GenAI Policies for Journals. This policy states:

We do not permit the use of Generative AI or AI-assisted tools to create or alter images in submitted manuscripts.

The only exception is if the use of AI or AI-assisted tools is part of the research design or methods (for example, in the field of biomedical imaging). If this is the case, such use must be described in a reproducible manner in the methods section, including the name of the model or tool, version and extension numbers, and manufacturer.

The use of generative AI or AI-assisted tools in the production of artwork such as for graphical abstracts is not permitted. The use of generative AI in the production of cover art may in some cases be allowed, if the author obtains prior permission from the journal editor and publisher, can demonstrate that all necessary rights have been cleared for the use of the relevant material, and ensures that there is correct content attribution.

Supplementary material
We encourage the use of supplementary materials such as applications, images and sound clips to enhance research. Some guidelines:

Supplementary material should be accurate and relevant to the research.

Cite all supplementary files in the manuscript text.

Submit supplementary materials at the same time as your article. Be aware that all supplementary materials provided will appear online in the exact same file type as received. These files will not be formatted or typeset by the production team.

Include a concise, descriptive caption for each supplementary file describing its content.

Provide updated files if at any stage of the publication process you wish to make changes to submitted supplementary materials.

Do not make annotations or corrections to a previous version of a supplementary file.

Switch off the option to track changes in Microsoft Office files. If tracked changes are left on, they will appear in your published version.

Video
This journal accepts video material and animation sequences to support and enhance your scientific research. We encourage you to include links to video or animation files within articles. Some guidelines:

When including video or animation file links within your article, refer to the video or animation content by adding a note in your text where the file should be placed.

Clearly label files ensuring the given file name is directly related to the file content.

Provide files in one of our recommended file formats. Files should be within our preferred maximum file size of 150 MB per file, 1 GB in total.

Provide "stills" for each of your files. These will be used as standard icons to personalize the link to your video data. You can choose any frame from your video or animation or make a separate image.

Provide text (for both the electronic and the print version) to be placed in the portions of your article that refer to the video content. This is essential text, as video and animation files cannot be embedded in the print version of the journal.

We publish all video and animation files supplied in the electronic version of your article.

For more detailed instructions, we recommend that you read our guidelines on submitting video content to be included in the body of an article.

Research data
We are committed to supporting the storage of, access to and discovery of research data, and our research data policy sets out the principles guiding how we work with the research community to support a more efficient and transparent research process.

Research data refers to the results of observations or experimentation that validate research findings, which may also include software, code, models, algorithms, protocols, methods and other useful materials related to the project.

Please read our guidelines on sharing research data for more information on depositing, sharing and using research data and other relevant research materials.

Research data deposit, citation and linkin

For this journal Option C instructions from our research data guidelines apply. This means you are required to:

Deposit your research data in a relevant data repository.

Cite and link to this dataset in your article.

If this is not possible, make a statement explaining why research data cannot be shared.

Data statement
To foster transparency, you are required to state the availability of any data at submission.

Ensuring data is available may be a requirement of your funding body or institution. If your data is unavailable to access or unsuitable to post, you can state the reason why (e.g., your research data includes sensitive or confidential information such as patient data) during the submission process. This statement will appear with your published article on ScienceDirect.

Read more about the importance and benefits of providing a data statement.

Data linking
Linking to the data underlying your work increases your exposure and may lead to new collaborations. It also provides readers with a better understanding of the described research.

If your research data has been made available in a data repository there are a number of ways your article can be linked directly to the dataset:

Provide a link to your dataset when prompted during the online submission process.

For some data repositories, a repository banner will automatically appear next to your published article on ScienceDirect.

You can also link relevant data or entities within the text of your article through the use of identifiers. Use the following format: Database: 12345 (e.g. TAIR: AT1G01020; CCDC: 734053; PDB: 1XFN).

Learn more about linking research data and research articles in ScienceDirect.

Co-submission of related data, methods or protocols
You are encouraged to publish a description of your research data, methods, or protocols related to your regular article as a co-submission article in Data in Brief or MethodsX.

This co-submission can be submitted at the same time as your regular manuscript submission to this journal. If both your regular and co-submitted manuscripts are accepted for publication, they will be linked together on ScienceDirect, thereby promoting research reproducibility, interoperability, and open science.

Prepare a separate manuscript describing your research data, methods, or protocols using the mandatory templates from Data in Brief or in MethodsX.

Submit this co-submission alongside your regular manuscript as a separate submission item; on the ‘Attach files’ page in Editorial Manager, after which it will be automatically forwarded to the Data in Brief or MethodsX and assigned an editor.

For associated Article Processing Charge (APC) details, please visit:

MethodsX

Data in Brief

Please note: Due to the automated process of submitting to Data in Brief or MethodsX, only after acceptance will you be presented with a personalized OA Article Publishing Charge based on your individual context (your country, institutional affiliation, and any society membership for example).

Please visit co-submission Researcher Support page for more information on how to submit a co-submission.

Article structure
Article sections
Divide your article into clearly defined and numbered sections. Number subsections 1.1 (then 1.1.1, 1.1.2, ...), then 1.2, etc.

Use the numbering format when cross-referencing within your article. Do not just refer to "the text."

You may give subsections a brief heading. Headings should appear on a separate line.

Do not include the article abstract within section numbering.

Glossary
Please provide definitions of field-specific terms used in your article, in a separate list.

Footnotes
We advise you to use footnotes sparingly. If you include footnotes in your article, ensure that they are numbered consecutively.

You may use system features that automatically build footnotes into text. Alternatively, you can indicate the position of footnotes within the text and present them in a separate section at the end of your article.

Acknowledgements
Include any individuals who provided you with help during your research, such as help with language, writing or proof reading, in the acknowledgements section. Acknowledgements should be placed in a separate section which appears directly before the reference list. Do not include acknowledgements on your title page, as a footnote to your title, or anywhere else in your article other than in the separate acknowledgements section.

Author contributions: CRediT
Corresponding authors are required to acknowledge co-author contributions using CRediT (Contributor Roles Taxonomy) roles:

Conceptualization

Data curation

Formal analysis

Funding acquisition

Investigation

Methodology

Project administration

Resources

Software

Supervision

Validation

Visualization

Writing – original draft

Writing – review and editing

Not all CRediT roles will apply to every manuscript and some authors may contribute through multiple roles.

We advise you to read more about CRediT and view an example of a CRediT author statement.

Funding sources
Authors must disclose any funding sources who provided financial support for the conduct of the research and/or preparation of the article. The role of sponsors, if any, should be declared in relation to the study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of data, writing of the report and decision to submit the article for publication. If funding sources had no such involvement this should be stated in your submission.

List funding sources in this standard way to facilitate compliance to funder's requirements:

Funding: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant numbers xxxx, yyyy]; the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA [grant number zzzz]; and the United States Institutes of Peace [grant number aaaa].

It is not necessary to include detailed descriptions on the program or type of grants, scholarships and awards. When funding is from a block grant or other resources available to a university, college, or other research institution, submit the name of the institute or organization that provided the funding.

If no funding has been provided for the research, it is recommended to include the following sentence:

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Appendices
We ask you to use the following format for appendices:

Identify individual appendices within your article using the format: A, B, etc.

Give separate numbering to formulae and equations within appendices using formats such as Eq. (A.1), Eq. (A.2), etc. and in subsequent appendices, Eq. (B.1), Eq. (B. 2) etc. In a similar way, give separate numbering to tables and figures using formats such as Table A.1; Fig. A.1, etc.

References
References within text
Any references cited within your article should also be present in your reference list and vice versa. Some guidelines:

References cited in your abstract must be given in full.

We recommend that you do not include unpublished results and personal communications in your reference list, though you may mention them in the text of your article.

Any unpublished results and personal communications included in your reference list must follow the standard reference style of the journal. In substitution of the publication date add "unpublished results" or "personal communication."

References cited as "in press" imply that the item has been accepted for publication.

Linking to cited sources will increase the discoverability of your research.

Before submission, check that all data provided in your reference list are correct, including any references which have been copied. Providing correct reference data allows us to link to abstracting and indexing services such as Scopus, Crossref and PubMed. Any incorrect surnames, journal or book titles, publication years or pagination within your references may prevent link creation.

We encourage the use of Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) as reference links as they provide a permanent link to the electronic article referenced.

Reference style
Indicate references by number(s) in square brackets in line in the text. You can refer to author names within your text, but you must always give the reference number, e.g., "as demonstrated [3,6]. Barnaby and Jones [8] obtained a different result ....".

Number the references in the reference list in the order in which they appear in the text.

Please note the shortened form for last page number. e.g., 51-9, and that for more than 6 authors the first 6 should be listed followed by 'et al.'.

For further details you are referred to 'Uniform Requirements for Manuscripts submitted to Biomedical Journals' (J Am Med Assoc 1997;277:927-34) and more samples of formatted references.

Abbreviate journal names according to the List of Title Word Abbreviations (LTWA).

Examples:

Reference to a journal publication:

[1] Van der Geer J, Hanraads JAJ, Lupton RA. The art of writing a scientific article. J Sci Commun 2020;163:51-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sc.2020.00372.

Reference to a journal publication with an article number:

[2] Van der Geer J, Hanraads JAJ, Lupton RA. The art of writing a scientific article. Heliyon. 2022;19:e00205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e00205.

Reference to a book:

[3] Strunk Jr W, White EB. The elements of style. 4th ed. New York: Longman; 2000.

Reference to a chapter in a book:

[4] Mettam GR, Adams LB. How to prepare an electronic version of your article. In: Jones BS, Smith RZ, editors. Introduction to the electronic age, New York: E-Publishing Inc; 2023, p. 281-304.

Reference to a website:

[5] Cancer Research UK. Cancer statistics reports for the UK, http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/aboutcancer/statistics/cancerstatsreport/; 2023 [accessed 13 March 2023].

Reference to a dataset:

[6] Oguro M, Imahiro S, Saito S, Nakashizuka T. Mortality data for Japanese oak wilt disease and surrounding forest compositions [dataset]. Mendeley Data. 2015. https://doi.org/10.17632/xwj98nb39r.1.

Reference to software:

[7] Coon E, Berndt M, Jan A, Svyatsky D, Atchley A, Kikinzon E, et al. Advanced Terrestrial Simulator (ATS). Version 0.88 [software]. Zenodo; 2020 Mar 25. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3727209.

Web references
When listing web references, as a minimum you should provide the full URL and the date when the reference was last accessed. Additional information (e.g. DOI, author names, dates or reference to a source publication) should also be provided, if known.

You can list web references separately under a new heading directly after your reference list or include them in your reference list.

Data references
We encourage you to cite underlying or relevant datasets within article text and to list data references in the reference list.

When citing data references, you should include:

author name(s)

dataset title

data repository

version (where available)

year

global persistent identifier

Add [dataset] immediately before your reference. This will help us to properly identify the dataset. The [dataset] identifier will not appear in your published article.

Software references
Cite software (including computational code, scripts, models, notebooks and libraries) in the same way as other sources of information to support proper attribution and credit, reproducibility, collaboration and reuse, and encourage building on the work of others to further research. To facilitate this, useful information is provided in this article on the essentials of software citation by FORCE 11, of which Elsevier is a member.

A reference to software should include the following elements:

Creator(s): the authors or project that developed the software.

Title: the name of the software.

Publication venue: the publication venue of the software, preferably, an archive or repository that provides permanent identifiers.

Date: the date the software was published. This is the date associated with a release or version of the software, or “n.d.” if the date is unknown.

Identifier: a resolvable pointer to the software, preferably, a PID that resolves to a landing page containing descriptive metadata about the software, similar to how a Digital Object Identifier (DOI) for a paper that points to a page about the paper rather than directly to a representation of the paper, such as the PDF. DOIs are preferable, and other examples of PIDs include Handles, RRIDs, ASCL IDs, swMath IDs, Software Heritage IDs, ARK Alliance, etc. If there is no PID for the software, a URL to where the software exists may be the best identifier available.

Version: the identifier for the version of the software being referenced. If the version is unidentified or unknown, the date of access should be used.

Type: some reference styles (e.g., APA), require a bracketed description of the citation (e.g., [Computer software]) to be included.

If an article exists that describes the software, it should be cited as an additional reference, as well as citing the software itself. Do not cite the article instead of the software.

Preprint references
We ask you to mark preprints clearly. You should include the word "preprint" or the name of the preprint server as part of your reference and provide the preprint DOI.

Where a preprint has subsequently become available as a peer-reviewed publication, use the formal publication as your reference.

If there are preprints that are central to your work or that cover crucial developments in the topic, but they are not yet formally published, you may reference the preprint.

Reference management software
Most Elsevier journals have their reference template available in popular reference management software products. These include products that support Citation Style Language (CSL) such as Mendeley Reference Manager.

If you use a citation plug-in from these products, select the relevant journal template and all your citations and bibliographies will automatically be formatted in the journal style. We advise you to remove all field codes before submitting your manuscript to any reference management software product.

If a template is not available for this journal, follow the format given in examples in the reference style section of this Guide for Authors.

Journal specific information
Use of word processing software

It is important that the file be saved in the native format of the word processor used. The text should be in single-column format. Keep the layout of the text as simple as possible. Most formatting codes will be removed and replaced on processing the article. In particular, do not use the word processor's options to justify text or to hyphenate words. However, do use bold face, italics, subscripts, superscripts etc. When preparing tables, if you are using a table grid, use only one grid for each individual table and not a grid for each row. If no grid is used, use tabs, not spaces, to align columns. The electronic text should be prepared in a way very similar to that of conventional manuscripts (see also the Guide to Publishing with Elsevier). Note that source files of figures, tables and text graphics will be required whether or not you embed your figures in the text. See also the section on Electronic artwork.

To avoid unnecessary errors you are strongly advised to use the 'spell-check' and 'grammar-check' functions of your word processor. When preparing your manuscript, please make sure that you strictly adhere to the Template for Original Software Publications.

LaTeX

The format of a software article is very different to a traditional research article. We will only consider software articles that are submitted using SoftwareX's template. You will find both a Word and a LaTeX template immediately below. Choose the one you prefer and fill in each section, without altering any format settings.

Word templates (please note that figures must be directly embedded in the .docx file):

Original software publication

Software update

LaTeX templates:

Original software publication

Software update

Additional support for your LaTeX submission:

Journal Article Publishing Support Center LaTeX FAQs and support.

Researcher Academy’s “Beginners’ guide to writing a manuscript in LaTeX”.

Submitting your manuscript
Submission checklist
Before completing the submission of your manuscript, we advise you to read our submission checklist:

One author has been designated as the corresponding author and their full contact details (email address, full postal address and phone numbers) have been provided.

All files have been uploaded, including keywords, figure captions and tables (including a title, description and footnotes) included. This includes any supplementary materials and videos.

Spelling and grammar checks have been carried out.

All references in the article text are cited in the reference list and vice versa.

Permission has been obtained for the use of any copyrighted material from other sources, including the Web.

For open access articles, all authors understand that they are responsible for payment of the article publishing charge (APC) if the manuscript is accepted. Payment of the APC may be covered by the corresponding author's institution, or the research funder.

Journal specific information
The format of a software article is very different to a traditional research article. We will only consider software articles that are submitted using SoftwareX's template. You will find both a Word and a LaTeX template immediately below. Choose the one you prefer and fill in each section, without altering any format settings.

Word templates (please note that figures must be directly embedded in the .docx file):

Original software publication

Software update

LaTeX templates:

Original software publication

Software update

Please note that the following constraints apply:

Maximum word count: 3000 excluding: title, authors, affiliations, references, metadata tables and including: abstract, running text, captions, footnotes. Maximum six (6) figures.

To submit your code/software you can:

Store your code/software in an open-access GitHub repository where it is publicly available. Record the URL needed to retrieve the code in the metadata table found in the required article templates. Please avoid using GitLab or other hosting platforms as this will slow the editorial process of your submission.

Please make sure that the permanent link to the GitHub repository includes the following requirements:

a. README.md and LICENSE.txt files. Your README.md file should be well-written, explaining the use, installation, and purpose of your proposed software. Please see other notable and well-cited GitHub repositories (including official GitHub guidance) for a better understanding of code documentation.

b. Source code in a repo/src directory.

All software and code must be open source and released under a recognized legal license such as those listed below and by the Open Source Initiative. Any licenses which are not listed below need to be approved by the Journal's Editorial Office.

Any additional material that you consider relevant to your submission can be uploaded and submitted either as "Supplementary Material" or "Supplementary data".

The submission website for SoftwareX is located at: https://www.editorialmanager.com/softx. You may need to establish a new user account, and later can consolidate it with any prior Elsevier user accounts.

If you are submitting an unpublished code/software for the first time, it is important that you select "Original Software Publication" when you reach the "Article Type" step in the submission process. If you are submitting an update to a code or software previously published on SoftwareX, please choose "Software Update" as "Article Type".

Uploading your manuscript in EM

Microsoft Word submission:

a. Use the template to create your manuscript.

b. Upload directly the .docx file of your manuscript on Editorial Manager in the field "*Manuscript (Word or PDF file)".

LaTeX submission:

a. Use the template to create your manuscript.

b. Upload the PDF file of your manuscript in the field "*Manuscript (Word or PDF file)" and provide the complete set of source files (.tex, figures, bibliography) as a .zip archive in the field "Zip file containing LaTeX source files".

c. Should you need any additional style file for compilation, please visit our LaTeX instructions page or contact us via email.

For any questions or comments, please contact us at: softwarex@elsevier.com.

We look forward to receiving your submission and thank you for your contribution.

After receiving a final decision
Article Transfer Service
If your manuscript is more suitable for an alternative Elsevier journal, you may receive an email asking you to consider transferring your manuscript via the Elsevier Article Transfer Service.

The recommendation could come from the journal editor, a dedicated in-house scientific managing editor, a tool-assisted recommendation or a combination.

If you agree with the recommendation, your manuscript will be transferred and independently reviewed by the editors of the new journal. You will have the opportunity to make revisions, if necessary, before the submission is complete at the destination journal.

Publishing agreement
Authors will be asked to complete a publishing agreement after acceptance. The corresponding author will receive a link to the online agreement by email. We advise you to read Elsevier's policies related to copyright to learn more about our copyright policies and your, and your employer’s/institution’s, additional rights for subscription and open access articles.

License options
Authors will be offered open access user license options which will determine how you, and third parties, can reuse your open access article. We advise that you review these options and any funding body license requirements before selecting a license option.

Open access
We refer you to our open access information page to learn about open access options for this journal.

Permission for copyrighted works
If excerpts from other copyrighted works are included in your article, you must obtain written permission from the copyright owners and credit the source(s) within your article using Elsevier’s permission request and license form (Word).

Proof correction
To ensure a fast publication process we will ask you to provide proof corrections within two days.

Corresponding authors will be sent an email which includes a link to our online proofing system, allowing annotation and correction of proofs online. The environment is similar to Word. You can edit text, comment on figures and tables and answer questions raised by our copy editor. Our web-based proofing service ensures a faster and less error-prone process.

You can choose to annotate and upload your edits on the PDF version of your article, if preferred. We will provide you with proofing instructions and available alternative proofing methods in our email.

The purpose of the proof is to check the typesetting, editing, completeness and correctness of your article text, tables and figures. Significant changes to your article at the proofing stage will only be considered with approval of the journal editor.

DOI link
A Digital Object Identifier (DOI) link to the published version of your open access article on ScienceDirect will be sent by email to the corresponding author. You can share the DOI link via email and within your social networks.

Responsible sharing
We encourage you to share and promote your article to give additional visibility to your work, enabling your paper to contribute to scientific progress and foster the exchange of scientific developments within your field. Read more about how to responsibly share and promote your article.

Resources for authors
Elsevier Researcher Academy
If you would like help to improve your submission or navigate the publication process, support is available via Elsevier Researcher Academy.

Elsevier Researcher Academy offers free e-learning modules, webinars, downloadable guides and research writing and peer review process resources.

Language and editing services
We recommend that you write in American or British English but not a combination of both.

If you feel the English language in your manuscript requires editing to eliminate possible grammatical or spelling errors and to conform to correct scientific English, you may wish to use the English Language Editing service provided by Elsevier’s Author Services.

Getting help and support
Author support
We recommend that you visit our Journal Article Publishing Support Center if you have questions about the editorial process or require technical support for your submission. Some popular FAQs:

How can I track the status of my submitted article?

When will my article be published?
